---
title: “Changes in a plant-based diet over the years”
date: '2021-01-29'
author: 'Charlie's Mum'
---
Growing up in a household where you are the only vegetarian/vegan is not always easy, yet, compared to when I was a young child, I was born in 1976, it is something that is much easier to do today. There are far greater options, far greater support, and resources available and a lot more people following the same diet, so you and/or your parents can find someone to talk to. These changes, of course, did not happen overnight, they were gradual but most notably in the last 10/15 years vegetarianism and in particular veganism has become quite mainstream.
 
I remember, as a vegetarian initially there was little option in supermarkets for vegetarian based foods and certainly not anything specifically labelled as vegan. In fact, I didn’t know there was even a category, I was simply a vegetarian that didn’t consume dairy. You could not so easily be that ‘junk-food’ vegan as you can now. Trying to get hold of plant-based milks, that was initially something that you might have had better luck locating at a health-food shop more than anything else. In fact, a lot of my products I did purchase at health shops, although more so, meals had to be made completely from scratch. Indian shops, if you were lucky to have one, was also a good place for products. However, being from a smaller town and not a large city, it really was not an option for me. Vegan cheese, egg replacer, plant-based butters, all the things that I am sure people often take for granted, were not an option in my youth and not for many years afterwards. I have frequently just had meals that consisted of potatoes and vegetables, the good old ‘meat and two veg’ that formed part of the standard English diet many years ago, without the meat of course.
 
Dining out when I was younger, there was not always that vegetarian option and certainly not a vegan choice. If you were lucky you had one vegetarian option and you just had to hope it was something you liked. The other issue to note was in medication at the time. Most medication, unless they were liquid-based, contained either lactose or gelatine, certainly not a vegan friendly option and then there are the vaccinations that often contain egg. It was not until later than lactose was replaced by talc and gelatine with pectin, unfortunately egg is still used in many vaccinations. Visiting other countries mind you and they do often still use these two animal by-products ingredients.
 
As the years rolled on more plant-based milks did begin to appear in the supermarkets, most notably soy at first. In the early years it did not taste all that great and was also quite expensive, but I am happy to say that it has most certainly improved in taste, and the price has also improved greatly. The same can be said of vegan cheeses, they were both pricy and an acquired taste and I believe it wasn’t until the early 2000’s before I even got to purchase some, all be it, from a health food shop, they hadn’t quite reached my local supermarkets at the time. I still believe vegan cheeses have a lot further to go to but, compared to those that were first made readily available what we have now is so much nicer and you can also get quite a variety.
 
Plant-based meats, you either love-them or hate-them but they are something allows vegetarians and vegans to enjoy remarkably similar meals to their omnivore companions. It can also be said that even many people on omnivore diets are opting to eat less meat, substituting it with these fake meats, embracing ‘meat-free Mondays’. Its baby steps but it is progress and given this was not an option for me years back, it is great progress to see.
 
The biggest change for me however was the length of time the grocery shopping did take. In my younger days I had to read through the ingredients lists of the products I wanted to purchase, checking on whether the packet of crisps, for example, contained animal products, many did if you were interested to know. These days there is not only dedicated vegetarian and vegan options within our supermarkets, but manufacturers are often kindenough to list whether their product is vegan and for those that do not list that you still have the ‘contains’ and ‘may contain’ information. It now takes me a lot less time to purchase groceries than it did. Well maybe it does not because now I find there is so many vegan choices available, milks, butters, cheeses, fake meats, ready-meals, snacks, cakes, yogurts, even junk-food, it is hard to decide. Junk-food, that still gets me, the fact you can still be unhealthy on a plant-based diet.
 
What is also great to see is that you can dine out and there are now vegan options on the menus of many cafes, restaurants, take-aways and even pubs. There is even vegan alcohol. You no longer must decide whether to opt to not dine out with friends and/or family, call ahead to see if you can bring your own foods or just not eat at all having eaten prior to going, or when you return home. In fact, there are many plant-based cafes and restaurants opening, petrol stations sell vegan options for those snacks on the go, even fast-food restaurants are embracing the plant-based options. I no longer need to carry that food in my bag each time I go out, although I still do, force of habit, I think. Vegan food has also improved with many foods looking and even tasting so close to their animal-based counterparts. Funny story in fact, a vegan café opened close to where I lived. It did not advertise itself as fully plant-based but did serve good, homely, comforting food. You can get amazing sausage rolls, pies, cakes etc and in those early days there were many workmen that came in for their sausage roll, or pie and a brew, not realising at the time that what they were ordering was plant-based. When they did discover, many weeks later, they had so enjoyed what these plant-based foods that they continued to do so and now incorporate much more plant-based meals within their diets.
 
When I think of how isolated and difficult it was to be a vegetarian and especially vegan all those years ago it really is a marvel on how far it has come in recent years. I really do feel it is now mainstream and it is very much accepted. It is no longer lonely to be a vegan, you do not have to worry about telling people anymore. That was extremely hard, in my younger years I often felt I had this big, terrible secret that I could not share, like it was somehow a sin to be vegan. I know it can be hard to imagine, even for me now, who lived through those years and saw the reactions of others when you say you are vegan and of course explain what it is, but it was very real. Fast-forward to a vastly different world today were in nearly all places of work, in universities and schools, all walks of life in fact, you will find that you are not the only one embracing veganism. Most people know what veganism is, many have eaten plant-based foods, most include them in their diets. There are great resources available for those wishing to embrace this diet and way-of-life. It is a changing world and one for the better, yes, there is still work to be done, but I have seen so many positive steps forward throughout my life, I am very excited to see what the future holds for vegans and vegetarians alike – The future is green.
 
