---
title: 'Is veganism just another fad diet?'
date: '2021-01-09'
author: 'Gracie Linthwaite'
---

I wish that I could say my interest in veganism started solely because of my love for animals, my care for the environment, and my hope for a better, kinder future. But it didn’t. I became intrigued by veganism because I thought it would make me ‘healthier’ - it would be an easy way to lose weight, and in my mind, make my body image and eating issues go away. This approach has largely been propounded by vegan influencers on social media - mostly thin, young white women - who credit a plant-based diet for clearing their skin, boosting their energy levels, and most importantly helping them lose weight. Such influencers, much to the detriment of the movement, have forged a link between veganism and diet culture: the overarching belief system that equates body size with health and worth, emphasises weight loss, and demonises certain foods, nutrients, or ways of eating while promoting others. Following this approach, when I first became vegan I was overly focused on what kind of food I should be eating and what I had to cut out. Yet with more and more vegan alternatives appearing on the market, however, I realised that veganism does not have to be as restrictive as it first seems. Delving further into veganism as a set of values with the help of documentaries such as Cowspiracy and Land of Hope and Glory, I realised that I really wanted to embrace it as a lifestyle, for it isn’t merely a diet. Veganism is an ethical decision. 

Diet culture is so ingrained in our values that is unsurprising that many influencers have conflated the vegan philosophy with it, watering down an anti-speciest movement founded in compassion for sentient beings into just another trend. The movement has been co-opted to push things like skinny teas, the banana diet and juice cleanses, so it is understandable that people often view it as a diet. Additionally, some within the vegan community adopt language such as ‘guilt-free’ or ‘clean’ to talk about food, label foods as ‘bad’ or ‘good’, and share ‘before and after’ photos of their bodies. This mindset is especially prevalent when it comes to celebrities trying plant-based diets or going vegan: Anne Hathaway has adopted a plant-based diet to lose weight for a role, Beyonce has adopted a plant-based diet before big performances or tours, and more recently Adele’s weight loss has been attributed to plant-based eating. These celebrities have mostly been presented by vegan influencers and publications as going vegan even though they are engaging with veganism as a diet, and not as a lifestyle choice. Celebrities’ supposed ‘transformations’ through following plant-based diets are often held up as examples that veganism can lead to weight loss. Yet not only does this draw a false equivalency between weight loss and veganism, but the plant-based diets that are undertaken for weight loss are often unsustainable and will eventually lead many people to eventually start consuming animal products again. The bottom line is that a restrictive diet is never going to be maintained, vegan or not. 

Yet despite this veganism can co-exist with body positivity and intuitive eating. With regards to food, it can be Buddha bowls and porridge, but it can also be animal-free burgers, pizza, and pasta. It is not inherently restrictive, nor is it pro-diet culture. Vegans come in all shapes and sizes and eat all sorts of things. It is diet culture that has shifted the focus from what veganism is really about at its core: animal liberation. It has diluted this fundamental purpose and replaced it with something harmful to people, both mentally and physically, making it all too easy to lose sight of the wonderful things that can be achieved through veganism, such as the environmental benefits and reduction of animal suffering. The movement has thus been seen as responsible for promoting disordered eating, and as a result schools such as Cheltenham Ladies College are now giving pupils regular blood tests if they decide to become vegan. It is this ‘diet culture’ strand of veganism that encourages the restriction of meat, dairy, and eggs for ‘health reasons’, leading people to think they are going vegan when what they are doing is using veganism as a guise to limit the foods they can eat. In many ways, diet culture is intrinsically linked to racism, sexism, and fatphobia. Yet since the values of veganism include ending oppression in all forms, and advocating for the liberation of all beings, vegans should logically be fighting against diet culture too, instead of trying to make veganism fit inside a toxic system of beliefs. 

In fact many people even to veganism when they are recovering from an eating disorder. The Green Recovery series on the blog The Full Helping creates a space for individuals to tell their stories: Gena, the blog’s author, writes: 

‘It’s true that veganism can prove to be complex, and perhaps counterproductive, to recovery. It is also true that it can teach us about food as nourishment, that it can spark excitement about the culinary process, that it can incite compassion for other living beings and for ourselves, and that it can broaden our awareness, helping us to exit the isolation and obsessiveness of an [eating disorder].’ 

By switching the focus from the individual to other sentient beings, veganism can help people realise that our food choices have a much bigger impact on others than they do on ourselves, as the benefits go beyond our own bodies. Conventional factory farming of animals has massively contributed to greenhouse gas emission, deforestation, land pollution, and other environmental issues, and the practices used to create animal products are cruel and inhumane. This emphasis helps the purpose and value of food transcend beyond calories to be more about a larger goal of doing better for all humankind. In addition, going vegan can actually encourage a more positive relationship with food; through veganising recipes and developing my own cooking skills, I have learnt that preparing and eating food can bring me enjoyment, happiness and nourishment. I no longer have a sense of guilt tied certain foods, and it is a liberating feeling knowing you are not contributing to the suffering of billions of animals each year and the destruction of our planet. 

As members of the vegan community, I think it is our duty and moral obligation to disentangle the values veganism teaches, compassion for all living beings, from diet culture and fat-phobia: when veganism is seen as another diet fad, it benefits no-one. On a fundamental level, you can’t claim to care about animal oppression and not care about fellow human suffering. Popular Instagram accounts such as uglyvegan, which normalise eating carbs and beige foods, have massively helped in this regard, and the abundance of products such as vegan Galaxy chocolate, Pukka pies, and desserts demonstrate that veganism is not a fad diet to help you lose weight, but so much more: it is about living a more ethical and environmentally friendly lifestyle for the animals and the planet we share with them.
